engine/README.md, before:

# 2004scape Server

[Website](https://2004scape.org) | [Discord](https://discord.gg/hN3tHUmZEN) | [Rune-Server](https://www.rune-server.ee/runescape-development/rs2-server/projects/701698-lost-city-225-emulation.html)

**disclaimer: All server code has been written from scratch for this project, Jagex has never had any source code leaks.**

**status: in-development, not ready for players**. Contributors are welcome to help out.

---

This project aims to replicate an authentic RuneScape experience from May 2004. It should be considered an emulator first and foremost, as replicating behaviors by emulating the underlying systems is the biggest focus. The config system and scripting system is as close to authentic as we understand it, and is continually refined as we learn more info.

---

*To Jagex*: This project comes out of love for the game. As MMOs age, their previous versions are lost to history. An experience becomes ephemeral and time-limited. We're aware that you have no backups for this era and so we're putting in the effort to recreate what we can.  
It won't ever profit off your trademarks. Without this project, this version of the game only lives in our memories. Screenshots and videos are scarce, and the original data is lost to time. This is no easy task.

*To players*: So happy to have you interested! RuneScape 2 launched on March 29, 2004. We have no copies of that revision, but we do have some client caches from May 2004. This project emulates *May 18, 2004*, which was live until June 1 of that year. It has Treasure Trails and Big Chompy Bird Hunting. The next revision after this added Elemental Workshop I.

## Environment Dependencies

- [NodeJS 16+](https://nodejs.org/en)
- [Java 17+](https://adoptium.net/)

Java is required for JagCompress.jar (a small 1:1 compression utility) and RuneScriptCompiler.jar (the content language compiler).

You can download JagCompress and RuneScriptCompiler from the [#dev-resources](https://discord.com/channels/953326730632904844/1125601647574396978) Discord channel. Place the jar files in the root directory of the project.  

[JagCompress is also available on GitHub](https://github.com/2004scape/JagCompress/releases). RuneScriptCompiler is not yet open-source, sorry for any inconvenience.

## Getting Started

1. Clone the repo
2. Install [environment dependencies](#environment-dependencies)
3. Run `npm install` to install code dependencies
4. Run `npm run cache:pack` to create the client cache. This may take a few minutes the first time
5. Run `npm run script:symbols && npm run script:compile`.
6. Run `npm start` to start the server

Commit message:

feat: Binary format for Param, Loc, and Obj types
New readme instructions - make sure to use server:pack for config changes now. You shouldn't have to run client:pack again after the first time.

engine/README.md, after:

# 2004scape Server

[Website](https://2004scape.org) | [Discord](https://discord.gg/hN3tHUmZEN) | [Rune-Server](https://www.rune-server.ee/runescape-development/rs2-server/projects/701698-lost-city-225-emulation.html)

**disclaimer: All server code has been written from scratch for this project, Jagex has never had any source code leaks.**

**status: in-development, not ready for players**. Contributors are welcome to help out.

---

This project aims to replicate an authentic RuneScape experience from May 2004. It should be considered an emulator first and foremost, as replicating behaviors by emulating the underlying systems is the biggest focus. The config system and scripting system is as close to authentic as we understand it, and is continually refined as we learn more info.

---

*To Jagex*: This project comes out of love for the game. As MMOs age, their previous versions are lost to history. An experience becomes ephemeral and time-limited. We're aware that you have no backups for this era and so we're putting in the effort to recreate what we can.  
It won't ever profit off your trademarks. Without this project, this version of the game only lives in our memories. Screenshots and videos are scarce, and the original data is lost to time. This is no easy task.

*To players*: So happy to have you interested! RuneScape 2 launched on March 29, 2004. We have no copies of that revision, but we do have some client caches from May 2004. This project emulates *May 18, 2004*, which was live until June 1 of that year. It has Treasure Trails and Big Chompy Bird Hunting. The next revision after this added Elemental Workshop I.

## Environment Dependencies

- [NodeJS 16+](https://nodejs.org/en)
- [Java 17+](https://adoptium.net/)

Java is required for JagCompress.jar (a small 1:1 compression utility) and RuneScriptCompiler.jar (the content language compiler).

You can download JagCompress and RuneScriptCompiler from the [#dev-resources](https://discord.com/channels/953326730632904844/1125601647574396978) Discord channel. Place the jar files in the root directory of the project.  

[JagCompress is also available on GitHub](https://github.com/2004scape/JagCompress/releases). RuneScriptCompiler is not yet open-source, sorry for any inconvenience.

## Getting Started

1. Clone the repo
2. Install [environment dependencies](#environment-dependencies)
3. Run `npm install` to install code dependencies
4. Run `npm run client:pack` to create the client cache. This may take a few minutes the first time
4. Run `npm run server:pack` to create the server cache. Re-run this each time you make server-sided config changes that don't have to be transmitted to the client.
5. Run `npm run script:symbols && npm run script:compile`.
6. Run `npm start` to start the server
